

# A key to seasonal shellfish exploitation: Elemental mapping of Mg/Ca ratios in lutruwita/Tasmania _Cellana_ limpets

 F. King<sup>a,f</sup>, E. Frost<sup>a</sup>, G.L. Stannard<sup>a,b,c</sup>, A.L. Prendergast<sup>c</sup>, N. Hausmann<sup>d,e</sup>

a Department of Archaeology and History, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia

b Faculty of Science and Technology, Federation University Australia, PO Box 663, Ballarat, VIC 3353, Australia

c School of Geography, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia

d Leibniz Zentrum für Archäologie (LEIZA), Mainz, Germany

d Römisch Germanisches Zentralmuseum (RGZM), Mainz, Germany

e BioArCh, Department of Archaeology, University of York, York, United Kingdom

f Bunurong Land Council Aboriginal Corporation, Braeside, Melbourne, Victoria


# Abstract

The littoral environment has a major influence on life history traits and patterns of growth in marine molluscs due to changes in water temperature, oxygen levels and nutrient availability. The outer shell that protects the soft bodied invertebrate is laid down as individual growth increments, which contain biogeochemical signatures in response to seasonal fluctuations and annual variations of their immediate environment. On lutruwita/Tasmania coastlines, the harvesting of shellfish as a dependable food resource sustained past Aboriginal people through variable climatic conditions of the Holocene period. The durability of mollusc shell in depositional sediments makes them one of the most ubiquitous materials in archaeological sites that can provide valuable archives on the season of consumption, subsistence strategies, and palaeoclimatic history. Yet, the ability to collect large sample-quantities for robust biogeochemical interpretations using oxygen isotope analysis (δ<sup>18</sup>Ο) can be restrictive due to time consuming sampling methodologies and expense. Recent developments in Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) offer an affordable, rapid and minimally invasive technique in screening zooarchaeological shell assemblages for variations in their temperature records. In our study, initial testing of modern lutruwita gastropods using LIBS to map elemental Mg/Ca intensity ratios in _Cellana solida_ (Blainville, 1825) produced positive results consistent with other limpet sclerochronology studies. Oxygen isotope measurements were used to calibrate LIBS results and interpret parallel changes in sea surface temperature (SST) to develop a model on the season of death in the modern samples. Results revealed high resolution records attributable to yearly SST variation as well as seasonal limpet feeding patterns indicating _C. solida_ as a potential key species for investigating past Aboriginal marine economies and landscape mobility patterns.

**Keywords **oxygen isotopes, Mg/Ca ratios, limpet shells, lutruwita, Tasmania, chlorophyll


# Key Points


# Introduction 


## Molluscs as environmental archives

The role of molluscs in the marine environment and functional aspects of their ecology provide valuable palaeoenvironmental indicators that can inform on past human behaviour and coastal subsistence patterns in the archaeological record [(Andrus 2011; Twaddle et al. 2016; West et al. 2018; Prendergast et al. 2018)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/8HLV+UUk8+1B4e+iN5s). Growth rates exhibited in shells are finely regulated by the organism’s physiology, limits of tolerance and external environmental conditions [(Schöne 2008)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/CkGg). Understanding a mollusc’s biology, trophic level, littoral habitat and conditions of the water column provide important starting points to interpret biogeochemical signatures laid down in the protective shell structures. These factors can favour, impede, or even halt the deposition of biogenic carbonate that show up as oscillating growth increments and hiatus lines over the life of the invertebrate [(Schöne 2008; Leng and Lewis 2016)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/CkGg+rKHV). As growth rates in marine molluscs are predominantly regulated by the ambient temperature of sea water, oxygen isotopes (δ<sup>18</sup>Ο) are used in seasonality studies to interpret colder or warmer growing conditions preserved in the shell growth increments [(e.g. Gutiérrez-Zugasti et al. 2015; Prendergast and Schöne 2017)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/bRiJ+n74V/?prefix=e.g.%20,).

Intra- and inter-specific variation in the formation of shell growth increments can occur in marine molluscs for a variety of reasons such as age, predation, competition, spawning, climatic events or freshwater inflows [(Kreutzer et al. 2007; Surge et al. 2013; Colonese et al. 2017; Prendergast and Schöne 2017; Jazwa et al. 2020)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/Arzl+6n9X+n74V+Zlbh+37mC). Metabolism and hence growth periods can also differ with sea surface temperatures and latitudinal distribution [(Schöne 2008; Ferguson et al. 2011; Surge et al. 2013; Graniero et al. 2017)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/CkGg+6n9X+QJ8t+Lfvd). Methodologies to enable sampling of multiple specimens are therefore essential for robust analyses, particularly in archaeological investigations involving large shell-matrix deposits across a number of human occupational periods. Elemental mapping using Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) offers a visual 2D representation of a shell’s biogeochemical concentrations (i.e. Mg/Ca intensity ratios) in an accessible, fast and cost-effective approach for large assemblages [(García-Escárzaga et al. 2015; Lu et al. 2015; Hausmann et al. 2017; Cobo et al. 2017)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/j3Sd+F9OK+OgMK+iUA1).

Previous oxygen isotope (δ<sup>18</sup>Ο) studies in marine environments associated with archaeological sites have focused predominantly in the northern hemisphere on a range of mollusc morphologies such as the topshells _Phorcus turbinatus_, _P. lineatus_, and _Monodonta lineata_  (Prendergast et al. 2013, 2016; García-Escárzaga et al. 2019a, b; Mannino et al. 2003; Bosch et al. 2018), the limpets _Patella caerulea_, _P. rustica_ and _P. vulgata_ (Prendergast and Schöne 2017; Ferguson et al. 2011; Gutiérrez-Zugasti et al. 2017); the conch _Conomurex fasciatus_ (Hausmann et al. 2017a; Hausmann and Meredith-Williams 2017), the mussels _Mytilus edulis_ and _M. californianus_ (Burchell et al. 2018; Jew et al. 2013) and butter clam _Saxidomus gigantea_ (Leclerc et al. 2023). Few δ<sup>18</sup>Ο studies have been undertaken in the southern hemisphere confined to venus clam _Anomalocardia flexuosa,_ oyster _Saccostrea glomerata, _pipi _Lotona deltoides _(syn. _Donax deltoides_)_, _mud shell_ Geloina erosa _(Colonese et al. 2017; Tynan et al. 2017; Izzo et al. 2017; Twaddle et al. 2017; Godfrey 1988), turban _Turbo sarmaticus_ (Galimberti et al. 2017; Loftus et al. 2019) and limpets _Nacella deaurata_ and _N. magellanica _(Colonese et al. 2012; Nicastro et al. 2020). Even fewer of these studies have focused on Australian molluscs. Furthermore, few mollusc taxa have been tested using LIBS analyses in the northern hemisphere and these have been confined to _Patella depressa_, _A. flexuosa_, _C. fasciatus_, _P. caerulea_, _M. californianus_ and_ Ostrea edulis_ (Martínez-Minchero**  **et al. 2023; García-Escárzaga et al. 2021; Hausmann et al. 2017b, 2019a, 2019b, 2019c, 2019d). The LIBS investigations in modern assemblages of the Mediterranean limpet _P. caerulea_ (n = 19) (Hausmann et al. 2019a) and the northern Spain limpet _P. depressa_ (n = 41777) (García-Escárzaga et al. 2021) revealed Mg/Ca intensity ratios aligned well with δ<sup>18</sup>Ο and satellite-derived SST values that were attributed to changes in local water temperatures, indicating the effectiveness of this technique in seasonality studies using limpets.

The patelloid limpets in the families Patellidae (_Patella_) and Nacellidae (_Nacella_) have emerged as a valuable shell archive in cool to temperate mid-latitude climates [(Wang et al. 2012; Colonese et al. 2012; Prendergast and Schöne 2017; Hausmann et al. 2019c; Nicastro et al. 2020; García-Escárzaga et al. 2020, 2021)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/zolI+JsfK+n74V+FXaK+Azbx+WjSY). Similarities in distinct sinusoidal growth patterns in these studies indicate patellids exhibit clear physiological control throughout their life span. However, some studies of limpet shells suggest limited to no trends between Mg/Ca ratios and sea surface temperatures [(Ferguson et al. 2011; Graniero et al. 2017)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/QJ8t+Lfvd). Although this may be due to site variability in ecological niche conditions. Additionally, Hausmann et al. [(2019c)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/FXaK/?noauthor=1) argues that the divergence of Mg/Ca ratios and δ<sup>18</sup>Ο SST values in these studies can be reconciled by the different sampling procedures used, which can also distort results in individual shells.

While growth patterns can be specimen specific [(Lewis and Bowman 1975; Vafidis et al. 2020; Cudennec and Paulet 2021)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/6vXe+kBAR+xliE), overall growth formation suggests that the patelloid group of molluscs exhibit strong annular signatures with sub-annual growth increments that can be sampled for high-resolution palaeoenvironmental reconstructions. For this reason, the orange-edged limpet _Cellana solida _(Blainville, 1825) was selected in this present study as a potential modern sea surface temperature and seasonality archive for lutruwita/Tasmania, Australia. _C. solida_ is a widespread species in southeastern Australia (Atlas of Living Australia, 2023) and well-preserved in archaeological sites in northwest lutruwita [(Jones 1965, 1966, 1971; Coleman 1966; Bowdler 1984; Stockton 1984)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/umI0+gcvz+FSyr+0KP2+wXWM+Z6aH). The limpet’s dish-shape (patelliform) and robust conical asymmetrical morphology (Denny 2000) tends to reduce shell fracture during trampling in archaeological deposits. Limpet shellfish provided an accessible food item for past human foragers with no requirements for shell breakage to extract relatively high meat yields. For these reasons, _C. solida _is an ideal species for sclerochronology studies, which are recovered predominantly as whole individuals in northwest lutruwita archaeological deposits, compared to the systematic shell processing of other smaller-sized gastropods such as warrener/wavy turban _Lunella undulata,_ ribbed top-shell _Austrocochlea constricta_ and tessellated top-shell _Diloma concameratum_ (King 2022; McNiven 1996; Coleman 1966). To date there have been no known oxygen isotope analyses (δ<sup>18</sup>Ο) of marine molluscs undertaken in lutruwita in the context of coastal subsistence reconstructions despite their abundance in cultural shell deposits and excavated archaeological material stored in museum archives. 

With this paper, the main objectives are to: 1. address the gap in high-resolution records of past lutruwita/Tasmania environments and human coastal palaeoecology through sclerochronological and  biogeochemical analysis (δ<sup>18</sup>Ο and Mg/Ca intensity ratios) of modern _C. solida_ shells grown in close proximity to archaeological sites and, 2. build the foundation for future work on establishing seasonal records of temperature change and human shellfish consumption in a temperate southern hemisphere site.


## Seasonality Approaches and Ethnohistorical Background 

In lutruwita/Tasmania, there has been a focus on skeletochronology to determine seasonal exploitation of inland resources from late Pleistocene vertebrates of the Bennett’s wallaby _Macropus rufogriseus_ and common wombat _Vombatus ursinus_ using growth increments and stable isotopes preserved in teeth [(Cosgrove and Pike-Tay 2004; Pike-Tay et al. 2008; Roberts et al. 2019)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/Qtij+xsiQ+p94n). Pike-Tay et al. [(2008)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/Qtij/?noauthor=1) revealed that systematic seasonal hunting of _M. rufogriseus_ occurred during the coldest period of winter to spring in low elevation sites and early spring to late summer in upland sites. Roberts et al. (2019) revealed both seasonal and bioregional variations in modern _V. ursinus_ dentition and tooth enamel associated with diet in different vegetation types across lutruwita, which has implications for archaeological interpretations. The earlier study of Bryden et al. 1999 on pinniped hunting at nungu/West Point in northwest lutruwita investigated the growth patterns in teeth of southern elephant seal _Mirounga leonina_ and found that systematic human harvesting targeted females and juveniles, which led to the extirpation of the breeding colony at around 1,000 years ago.

With no empirical evidence available on seasonal shellfish consumption in northwest lutruwita, insights can be derived from ethnohistorical literature. Expeditions of George Augustus Robinson in 1830, 1832 and 1834 recorded a series of Aboriginal tracks along the northwest coastline and inland forests [(Plomley 2008)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/J4kS). Jones [(1974: 332-333)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/PCDK/?locator=332%E2%80%93333&noauthor=1) suggested that these ‘well-marked footpaths or roads’ were important routes for Aboriginal trade and seasonal movement between amicable neighbouring clans of the North West, North and Big River nations [(Ryan 2012: 22-26)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/tTSN/?locator=22%E2%80%9326). Historical observations of coastal foods by Robinson and early explorers collated by Hiatt [(1967)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/ni28/?noauthor=1) point to a year-round use of coastal sites in the northwest where marine molluscs were harvested in all seasons, in conjunction with other seasonally available foods [(Hiatt 1967)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/ni28). Similarly, comparative seasonality studies of Vanderwal and Horton [(1984)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/qe92/?noauthor=1) from faunal bone in southwest Tasmania found that sites were occupied at different times – some sites mainly in summer, others in winter only, while other sites were occupied periodically across all seasons depending on the seasonal abundance of marine and terrestrial resources [(Vanderwal et al. 1984: 93)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/qe92/?locator=93).

As local fluctuations in seasons dictate timing in the availability of food sources, so too are subsistence practices influenced by complex cultural traditions and past human practices [(Cameron 2016)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/03D4). The logistics of regional mobility, trade networks and foodways can also direct the scheduling of resources [(Binford 1980)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/9Tax). In lutruwita, Colhoun and Shimeld (2012) and Cosgrove (2015) suggest land use movements were confined to the broad language boundary generally aligned to the mountainous high rainfall region of the western lutruwita/Tasmania and the dolerite rain-shadow hills and plateaus of eastern lutruwita/Tasmania. This socio-economic divide, characterised by two biogeographically diverse landscapes, has been the focus of numerous archaeological investigations [(e.g. Lourandos 1968; Jones 1974; Cosgrove 1999, 2015; Cosgrove and Allen 2001; Bowern 2012; Allen et al. 2016; Theys et al. 2019)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/8J5Y+PCDK+ZVbq+7OYb+S01h+3fu7+kKWc+Tfnv). However, Pike-Tay et al. [(2008: 2532)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/Qtij/?locator=2532&noauthor=1) states that ‘little is known of how the eastern subsistence system articulated with the west or how the coasts were integrated with the inland’. This highlights the potential role of marine molluscs in lutruwita as seasonal proxies in elucidating yet unanswered questions of coastal subsistence through time.


## Environmental Setting 


### _Archaeological context of lutruwita/Tasmania northwest coast_

The northwest coast of lutruwita/Tasmania comprises two contrasting shorelines: sandy beaches, estuaries and rocky headlands that face north onto Bass Strait, and exposed rock-dominated shores, vegetated transgressive dunes and small embayments on the west adjoining the Southern Ocean [(Short 2019)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/CwSQ). Separating these two oceanic regions is King Island affording protection to the northern shoreline from high westerly swells generated by prevailing winds of the ‘roaring forties’ that circulate the mid-latitudes of southern Australia [(Short 2006)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/jyVI). Major ocean currents off northwest lutruwita are fed by warm westerly flows through Bass Strait by the East Australian Current in summer and eastward cool temperate flows of the South Australian Current (SAC) in winter [(Wijeratne et al. 2012)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/gopO). On the west coast the SAC extends southward as the Zeehan Current along the continental shelf to the sub-Antarctic zone [(Cresswell 2000; Shepherd and Edgar 2013)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/FyW6+7bIa). The Southern Ocean plays an important role in global climate mediation, carbon dioxide sequestration and high chlorophyll productivity that supports critical food webs [(Deppeler and Davidson 2017)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/kVgo). The availability of nutrients essential to marine biota in the euphotic zone are circulated in the Southern Ocean via numerous mesoscale eddies within the water column (Dawson et al. 2018). While nutrient levels are generally low in the open waters of Bass Strait, elevated chlorophyll levels develop along the continental shelf break from the upwelling of cold nutrient-rich subsurface waters [(Gibbs et al. 1986a)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/je2k). In winter high concentrations of chlorophyll-_a_ occur on the leeward side of King Island and inshore islands and flow eastward alongshore close to the Bass Strait shoreline [(Gibbs et al. 1986a; b, 1991; EU Copernicus Marine Service information (2023); Figure 1)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/je2k+32lk+GG7z+i8u6).

Modern climatic conditions of northwest lutruwita are temperate oceanic consisting of mild winters and cool summers [(Bureau of Meteorology 2023)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/jzjn). The coldest month recorded at Smithton aerodrome (35 km west of the study area) is July averaging 13.1° C (mean maximum) and 4.8° C (mean minimum), with the warmest month being February averaging 22.0° C (mean maximum) and 11.6° C (mean minimum) [(BOM 2023)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/jzjn). Smithton’s mean monthly sea surface temperature (SST) ranges between 12.8 to 12.6° C in the coldest period of July to September, and 17.3 to 17.1° C during the warmest months of February to March (World Sea Temperature 2023). Palaeoclimatic SSTs from δ<sup>18</sup>Ο in marine ice cores indicate that temperatures were up to 7° C colder than present in southern Australia during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) at 18,000 years BP [(Barrows and Juggins 2005; Petherick et al. 2013)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/9vyR+bdKq). Prior to the LGM, Bass Strait was an exposed grassland plain with low plateaus along the western and eastern margins, and a central lake basin [(Hope 1978; Harris 2012)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/GPoG+TLSv). The Bassian Plain connected Tasmania to the Australian mainland enabling human settlement to this southern-most region of the Sahul (Greater Australia) landmass from at least 34,790±510 cal BP (Beta-42122B) [(Allen 1996; Cosgrove 1999; Williams et al. 2018)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/342b+ZVbq+HKuk). With increasing temperatures and rapid deglaciation following the LGM, Bass Strait was inundated by meltwater by 11,000 years BP, leaving the small plateaus exposed as the Bass Strait islands [(Williams et al. 2018)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/HKuk). At around 8,000 years BP, sea level stabilised close to present levels forming the relatively shallow Bass Strait at 60 m mean depth [(Barrows and Juggins 2005)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/9vyR). Although Cave Bay Cave, located on inshore Hunter Island, was first occupied at 26,956 cal BP (ANU-1498) (Bowdler 1984: 44) during low sea levels, the well-developed coastal economy at pinmatik/Rocky Cape South Cave on the northern shoreline of Bass Strait represents the oldest known Holocene coastal archaeological site in lutruwita with a basal date of 8,233 cal BP (V86) [(Jones 1971: 185; Hope 1999)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/FSyr+wXWM+QnlX).


### _Study area of pinmatik/Rocky Cape_

The prominent Precambrian quartzite headland of pinmatik/Rocky Cape (40˚51ˊS, 145˚30ˊE) is composed of cross-bedded quartz arenite with siltstone layers [(Spry 1957; Halpin et al. 2014)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/v9Vv+jOm6) (Figure 2). Tidal range is high at a mean of 3 m due to wave energy amplification in Bass Strait that causes meso-tide conditions along most of the northern coastline [(Short 2006)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/jyVI). At pinmatik, the eulittoral and sublittoral zones consist of rocky substrates that extend 200 m offshore in a complex reef system with submerged sea caves and exposed sea stacks [(Barrett and Wilcox 2001)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/5f4V). While most of the northern shore of Bass Strait is sheltered, pinmatik is moderately exposed because of increased wave exposure from the prevailing westerly winds and swells [(Edgar 1984; Barrett and Wilcox 2001)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/cVzl+5f4V). The rock dominated shoreline in this part of the lutruwita northwest coast is characterised by small coves interspersed with narrow surge channels, steeply angled rockfaces and cobble/boulder beaches overlying the quartzite bedrock base. These substrates provide a range of molluscan microhabitats for a diversity of gastropods, bivalves and chitons.

Coastal archaeological excavations have been undertaken at caves sites at pinmatik/Rocky Cape and tuyala/Sisters Creek, nungu/West Point open site and Cave Bay Cave (Jones 1965, 1971; Colley 1987; Dunnett 1993) with recent reinvestigations at pinmatik (Frost 2023) and tuyala (King 2022). Past Aboriginal occupation of the two cave sites at pinmatik – Rocky Cape North and Rocky Cape South, are located on the eastern side of the headland adjacent to a prominent cliff and ridgeline outcrop (see Figure 2). Extensive cultural shell deposits in these cave sites are located within 60 to 80 m above the accessible rocky intertidal zone. The most abundant molluscs harvested during the mid to late Holocene period in northwest lutruwita were the warrener/wavy turban _L. undulata_, ribbed top-shell _A. constricta_, tessellated top-shell _D. concameratum_, common cartrut-shell _Dicathais orbita, _blacklip abalone_ Haliotis rubra _and orange-edged limpet _C. solida, _which are common in the modern littoral zone today, These shellfish provided a dependable protein-rich food source indicated by the large discard rates in the excavated cave sediments [(Jones 1965, 1966, 1971; Coleman 1966; Bowdler 1984; King 2022; Frost 2023)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/umI0+gcvz+FSyr+0KP2+wXWM)_._ These shell deposits present the opportunity of large sample numbers to investigate the seasonal tempos in site use and other zooarchaeological subsistence remains. Of importance in palaeoenvironmental reconstructions is the selection of modern analogues that can be tied to archaeological samples at the site level and the ability to interpret biogeochemical and physiological attributes [(Andrus 2011; Twaddle et al. 2016)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/8HLV+UUk8). On this basis and previous well-documented stable isotopes studies of patelloid limpets, as discussed above, indicate that _C. solida_ is a valid choice for investigation.


### _Ecological perspectives of Cellana solida (Blainville, 1925)_

The genus _Cellana_ belongs to the Patellogastropoda subclass of gastropods in the family Nacellidae [(Grove 2018)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/2o6T). _C. solida _is endemic to southeastern Australia occurring along the coastal margins of South Australia, Victoria, southern New South Wales, and is the largest and most frequently occurring limpet species in Tasmania [(Grove 2011, 2018)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/2o6T+kPSN). The closely related _Cellana tramoserica_ (González-Wevar et al. 2017) is prominent in southeastern Australia, particularly along Victoria’s east coast where it is the second highest ranked shellfish resource in coastal shell middens, replacing _C. solida_ (Sullivan 1981: 80). _C. solida_ occupies the full vertical distribution of rocky substrates in the middle-intertidal zone [(Bennett and Pope 1960](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/EcQZ)). The genus _Cellana _is an intertidal grazer, where experimental observations in _C. tramoserica_ indicate a range of microalgal types are ingested in proportion to the seasonal abundance available on the rock surface [(Underwood 1984a)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/YmJE). The shell morphology of limpets comprises variations of a simple cone shape with a high spire and strong ridges that help to regulate heat stress [(Harley et al. 2009)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/ZkuW). As limpets are slow moving and tend to forage around their home scar, physiological heat exposure is common [(Shanks 2002; Harley et al. 2009)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/ZkuW+akrw). An early sclerochronology study of molluscs associated with Tasmanian archaeological sites by Cane and Stockton [(1978: 158)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/Nc2E/?locator=158&noauthor=1) suggest that _C. solida_ displayed prominent ‘stress and non-stress’ growth increments. 

Nacellid limpet studies undertaken by Underwood [(1984a, b)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/YmJE+raEG/?noauthor=1,1) on _C. tramoserica_ in New South Wales, Australia, found distinct seasonal differences in the availability of chlorophyll levels in the microalgal food source. Levels were higher in winter compared to summer where there was an abrupt decline in diatoms, blue-green algae and other unicellular algae. The seasonal distribution of chlorophyll-_a_ levels from high resolution satellite data surrounding Rocky Cape show a distinct sinusoidal pattern over a 26-year period with significantly high levels occurring during the coldest period of July, August and September [(see Figure 1)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/i8u6). Whilst Underwood [(1984a, b)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/YmJE+raEG/?noauthor=1,1) found no difference in gastropod density, the limiting factor in _Cellana_ growth patterns tended to be food availability. The vertical distribution of diatoms was shown to be an important factor in summer when available chlorophyll decreased due to high insolation exposure, particularly at low tide, including a more intense summer _Cellana_ grazing activity. Similar studies on the east coast of South Africa by Lasiak and White [(1993: 107)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/L9dv/?locator=107&noauthor=1) also demonstrate competition for microalgal food sources where higher densities of _Cellana_ in summer and autumn led to a reduction in growth and tissue mass compared to winter and spring. 


# Materials and methods


## _Modern mollusc collection_

Specimens of _Cellana solida_ (Blainville, 1825) used in this study (n = 6) were collected live at low tide from pinmatik/Rocky Cape on 2 June 2017 (Figure 3; Table 1). An oyster knife was used to pry the strongly adhering molluscs from the rock substrate. All samples were frozen following collection and transported in a portable freezer to La Trobe University in Melbourne, Victoria. Specimens were then thawed, and the flesh was removed and refrozen for additional studies.  Shells were rinsed in deionised water in an ultrasonic bath then oven-dried overnight at 40 º C. Table 1 provides the list of specimens from pinmatik north and south sites. 


## _Water samples_

Samples of seawater (n = 2) were taken from the sublittoral zone at the time of mollusc collection during low tide  to test …….


## _Shell preparation for sclerochronological analyses_

Shell specimens were sectioned to expose their interior growth structure using a Buehler ISOMET 1000 Precision Saw (Model 11-2180) and Buehler Diamond Wafering Blade (Series 15LC Diamond No 11-4276). Specimens were cut along their longitudinal axis at their longest extent, which produced a section containing two records arranged in a broad v-shape. The part of the shell containing the most visible growth increments is the M+2 layer according to MacClintock’s (1967) classification of Pattelidae microstructures. This layer, which occurs above the muscle attachment scar, contains a record of growth increments which extend inwards from the most recent at the ends of the shell, towards the shell apex (Figure 4). Sections were then lightly ground using metallographic grit paper (P800) to ensure a flat section for subsequent elemental mapping.

In preparation for growth and stable isotope analyses, two 2 mm thick sections were cut from each shell analysed using LIBS. The shell halves were mounted on plexiglass blocks using quick drying epoxy. The maximum growth axis of each shell was coated with JB KWIK-Weld epoxy resin to avoid shell fracturing during cutting. Shells were cut using a low-speed saw (Buehler Isomet 1000; 250 rpm) equipped with a 0.4-mm-thick diamond-coated wafering blade. Shell sections were mounted on glass slides, ground on glass plates with F800 and F1200 SiC grit powder, then polished on a Buehler G-cloth using 1 µm Al<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub> powder. Between each grinding and polishing step, adhering particles were removed in an ultrasonic bath of deionised water. One polished section was stained from each shell using Mutvei’s solution at 37-40º C for 20 minutes under constant stirring [(Schöne et al. 2005)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/SBVl). The sections were gently rinsed in deionised water and air-dried. Mutvei’s solution enhances the visibility of growth structures within the shell by staining sugars which are generally more concentrated at major growth lines and etches the shell increments between growth lines that contain fewer organics [(Schöne et al. 2005)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/SBVl). Sections were studied under a Leica M80 stereomicroscope with inbuilt camera at 7.5 to 60× magnification and images were stitched together using Leica microscope software.

Calcium carbonate  powder samples were milled at 10 to 20× magnification from the unstained cross-sections using a Rexim Minimo drill mounted to a stereo microscope and equipped with a 1 mm cylindrical diamond-coated bit. Samples were taken from the outer, concentric cross-foliated calcite layer equivalent to the M+2 layer defined by MacClintock [(1967)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/Xovm/?noauthor=1). The orientation of the micro growth increments in the M+2 layer identified on stained and unstained sections guided the milling process. Each sample weighed between 50 to 100 μg and sample resolution ranged between xx-xx µm in the direction of shell growth.


## _Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy_

All Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) were performed at the Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser of the Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas in Heraklion. To study the Mg/Ca ratios within the specimens, a 2D screening methodology was employed as previously undertaken for the Mediterranean _Patella _limpets [(Hausmann et al. 2019c)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/FXaK), as well as other marine molluscs [(see Hausmann et al. 2019a, d)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/5BsF+dhSm/?prefix=see%20,). As sampling with LIBS is less destructive than sampling for stable isotope analysis, elemental mapping was performed first. Details of the method are available on protocols.io [(Hausmann et al. 2019b)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/93vf). Briefly, a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (wavelength: 1064 nm, pulse duration, 10 ns; pulse energy: ~ 10 mJ) was employed, which was focused onto the shell surface to produce a sampling area with a diameter of about 50 μm. A plasma plume was created consisting of the substrate within the sampling area, and the emitted light transported via glass fibre to a Czerny-Turner spectrograph (Jobin Yvon, TRIAX 320) in conjunction with an intensified charge coupled device (ICCD) detector (DH520- 18F, Andor Technology). Spectra were acquired 0.5 μs after the firing of the laser pulse with an integration time of 1 μs, based on the acquisition parameters performed in Hausmann et al. [(2017)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/OgMK/?noauthor=1) using standards developed by Cobo et al. [(2017)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/iUA1/?noauthor=1). Intensity counts were used at the emission lines of Ca II (<sup>2</sup>D<sub>3/2</sub>→ <sup>2</sup>P<sub>1/2</sub>) at 315.887 nm and Mg II (<sup>2</sup>P<sub>3/2</sub> → <sup>2</sup>S<sub>1/2</sub>) at 279.553 nm to calculate the Mg/Ca intensity ratios, which were then combined with the xyz-coordinates of the motorised stage that holds the sample, to create an elemental map.


## _Oxygen isotope analysis _

All stable isotope analyses were performed at the stable isotope laboratory at the School of Geography, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at the The University of Melbourne on a Nu Instruments Perspective dual inlet isotope ratio mass spectrometer (DI-IRMS) connected to a NuCarb carbonate preparation system. Isotope data were calibrated against an NBS 19 calibrated, in-house Carrara marble standard (δ<sup>18</sup>O = − 1.91‰). Results are reported in parts per mil (‰) relative to the international standard VPDB. Internal precision (1σ) and accuracy (1σ) were generally better than 0.06 ‰.

For oOxygen isotope ratios from seawater (δ<sup>18</sup>O<sub>water</sub>)  awere measured in the stable isotope laboratory at the School of Geography, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at the The University of Melbourne. Approximately 2 mL of filtered sample water (0.22 mm Sartorius syringe filters) was analysed using a Picarro L2140i cavity ring-down isotope analyser. The analyses were run in ‘high-precision’ mode, in which six injections per sample were introduced to the vaporiser. To eliminate memory effects, the injection needle was rinsed three times in deionised water between vials, and only data from the last three injection results of each vial were used to calculate the final delta values. Sample isotopic ratios were normalised to the international V-SMOW scale using a five-point calibration based on international standard reference materials (GISP2 and V-SMOW) and in-house standards (WOOLIES, LAKE and SNOW) of known composition. Instrument drift was monitored by running the WOOLIES standard every ten unknowns, but corrections were not required due to machine stability. The results from the WOOLIES standards were used to determine the analytical uncertainty (1s) (≤0.15‰ for δ18O and ≤0.74‰ for δD).


## Dynamic time warping

The limited sample size due to the single collection period prevented a more in-depth seasonality study including many specimens across multiple seasons, as has been done elsewhere [(Mannino et al. 2003; Colonese et al. 2009; Prendergast et al. 2013; Parker et al. 2017; Nicastro et al. 2020)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/lsYh+1YBS+eeFd+VobU+Azbx). To still get an idea of how accurately the shell records reflect the seasonal temperature change, we applied Dynamic time warping by using the R-package “dtw” [(Giorgino 2009)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/hBRX). Dynamic time warping allowed us to statistically compare and fit similarly shaped time series that operate on different scales and that might include hiatuses in their records. By statistically fitting these curves, it is possible to assess correlations between them. The specific code as well as the geochemical data is available [here](https://github.com/Niklas-palaeo/Cellana).


# Results


## _Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy_

Elemental mapping of the six _C. solida_ specimens produced maps that are typical for patelloid limpet shells, with higher Mg/Ca intensity ratios between 0.20 and 1.00 in the calcitic parts in the exterior of the shell, and lower intensity ratios between 0.01 and 0.10 in the aragonitic parts in the interior of the shell. While the general patterns of time-resolved Mg/Ca intensity ratio changes were visible in all specimens, some suffered a lot of background noise (C8, C18), superimposing time-resolved patterns of elemental change. Background noise was not restricted to either sampling area and occurred in both the North and South sites. Time-resolved patterns are mirrored among the three samples in each sampling area, suggesting an external control that equally affected specimens. With the exception of C9 all shell records end in a period of decline in Mg/Ca intensity ratio, which is in agreement with the month of collection (June, with July being the coldest month of the year). In some specimens (C7, C9 in particular), a brief period of high Mg/Ca intensity ratio was observed, which may correspond to a cessation of growth during certain seasons.The brief period of high Mg/Ca intensity ratio in some specimens (C7, C9 in particular) indicates some degree of seasonally occurring growth cessation, related to warm temperatures or strong local competition for scarce food sources [(Lasiak and White 1993)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/L9dv), which could extend to the colder months and explain the lack of recent growth in C9. Apart from specimens C7 and C9, other specimens show declines in growth rate or potentially growth cessations as narrow bands of high Mg/Ca intensity ratio during Summer. 


## _Oxygen isotope analysis_

Sequential δ<sup>18</sup>O<sub>S</sub> values show quasi-sinusoidal trends in both analysed specimens. Both specimens produced similar ranges of –0.16 to +2.15 ‰ (C16) and –0.26 to +2.20‰ (C17). Similarly, both specimens have comparable terminal edge values of 1.20‰ and 1.15‰, respectively.

The palaeotemperatures for both edge values were calculated using the temperature equation for calcite by Kim and O’Neil [(1997)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/XqK7/?noauthor=1) with a salinity estimate of 35 psu, which corresponds to a δ<sup>18</sup>O<sub>W</sub> value of 0.55‰ following the water salinity equation by Pierre [(1999)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/4A7d/?noauthor=1). The results (C16: 14.6ºC and C17: 14.8ºC) compare favourably with the SST measured at the day of collection (15.3 ºC).

Furthermore, the SST curve of the past 3.5 years was used to estimate the change in δ<sup>18</sup>O<sub>S</sub> expected to be recorded in the mollusc shell (δ<sup>18</sup>O<sub>est.</sub>). Using dynamic time warping both curves were statistically fitted to carry out a regression analysis, resulting in a good correlation with an R<sup>2</sup> value for C16 of 0.93 (p&lt;0.001) and an R<sup>2</sup> value for C17 of 0.84 (p&lt;0.001). 


## _Elemental ratio and δ<sup>18</sup>O correlation_

The comparison of δ<sup>18</sup>O values with the elemental ratios and SST data was carried out using visual assessments for all three datasets as well as Dynamic Time Warping for the comparison of δ <sup>18</sup>O and Mg/Ca in particular.  

The visual assessment of the three curves revealed strong similarities between the geochemical records. Annual temperature maxima are indicated in Figure 9 by vertical dotted lines. They occur in the SST record at similar intervals (i.e. 12 months) but less regular in the geochemical datasets. This irregularity is likely due to changes in growth rate, with the last year before death having a much higher growth rate than the one or two years before. While the exact location of the δ<sup>18</sup>O samples is unknown, the distance between samples was more or less homogenous and the location of annual temperature maxima (i.e. δ<sup>18</sup>O minima) in the dataset mirrors the location of the same maxima in the Mg/Ca record. Compared to the Mg/Ca data, the δ<sup>18</sup>O<sub>Shell </sub>records do not cover the same length and are shorter by about 1 year’s worth of growth. This can be explained by the different sampling methods used for both proxies as it is difficult to mill sufficient powder from the M+2 layer for stable isotope analysis as it thins towards the shell apex.

Using Dynamic Time Warping, we aligned the datasets and performed a regression analysis of the remaining sample points (Fig. 10). Both shells had highly significant (p&lt;0.001) negative correlation with R<sup>2</sup> values of 0.81 (C16) and 0.84 (C17). Given the differences in range of Mg/Ca ratios between both shells, the inclines of the regression curves were different.


# Discussion

From libs:

 Time-resolved patterns are mirrored among the three samples in each sampling area, suggesting an external control that equally affected specimens.

The brief period of high Mg/Ca intensity ratio in some specimens (C7, C9 in particular) indicates some degree of seasonally occurring growth cessation, related to warm temperatures or strong local competition for scarce food sources (Lasiak and White 1993), which could extend to the colder months and explain the lack of recent growth in C9

Elem ratio and δ18o:

The similarity between Mg/Ca and δ18O indicates that the annual extremes occur at the same time in both records and that both proxies are mainly controlled by SST.

THIS IS JUST GRABBED FROM ABOVE AND DUMPED HERE:

The short-lived periods of high Mg/Ca intensity ratios in comparison to broad bands of low Mg/Ca intensity ratios, could also indicate that increased ratios could be linked to the occurrence of organic components within the crystal fabric of the shell, similar to other mollusc species [(Foster et al. 2008; Takesue et al. 2008; Marali et al. 2016)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/58pr+gN8t+8DJy).

Different inclines and ranges of the regression curves will prevent a general temperature equation that is valid for an entire species or locality. These differences are not dissimilar to other studies that found inconsistent Mg/Ca ratios within one growth increment or between two coeval specimens [(Hausmann et al. 2019; Hausmann et al. 2019)](https://paperpile.com/c/OePltT/FXaK+dhSm). The gradual change of Mg/Ca towards the exterior of the shell prevents us from defining a specific Mg/Ca ratio for a specific growth increment and thus also for a specific time. This inconsistency results in a steeper or flatter incline. In addition, the specimen specific Mg/Ca offset would raise or lower even regression curves with similar inclines. While the offset could also be due to changes in LIBS sampling conditions (temperature, position of the glass fibre) and could be resolved by using more accurate quantitative methods (e.g. LA-ICP-MS), the intra-increment inconsistencies are potentially due to a zonation of the crystal fabric and are more difficult to solve.

The good correlation between estimated and measured δ18Ο values is likely to be partly a result of dynamic time warping smoothing some irregularities, which would otherwise be more visible. For instance in the case of a month by month analysis of edge samples. Nevertheless, the accurate temperature data gained from the two terminal edge samples are good indicators that the relationship between δ18Ο values and sea surface temperature is comparable to other studies of limpets (Colonese et al. 2011; Prendergast and Schöne 2017; Gutiérrez-Zugasti et al. 2017; García-Escárzaga et al. 2020).


# Conclusion

Geochemical analysis of the shell carbonate using the elemental ratios of magnesium to calcium and stable oxygen isotope values has shown regular and predictable variations that are mirrored in the changes of the surrounding sea surface temperature. Repeating patterns related to the SST suggest that the shells of this species can be used as paleothermometers in an archaeological or paleoclimatological context. However, the inconsistencies found between even coeval specimens prevent the development of a general temperature equation for C. solida that integrates Mg/Ca and d18O. Because of this, we recommend caution when using Mg/Ca ratios as a standalone proxy for sea surface temperature reconstructions in C. solida, and suggest that future studies explore the combined use of multiple proxies to improve the accuracy and reliability of temperature reconstructions.


# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported under the Australian Research Council Discovery Project (DP150100586) “Well beaten tracks: antiquity of Aboriginal land use in eastern Tasmania” and La Trobe University Post-Graduate Scholarship to FK and EF. Molluscs were collected under Scientific Permit No. ……. to EF. AP was supported by a DECRA Fellowship from the Australian Research Council during this research. NH and the elemental analyses were supported by the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Individual Fellowship Project ACCELERATE (‘Archaeological and climatic data from elemental ratios using rapid Analysis of shell carbonate’), Grant Agreement No. 703625. The authors would like to thank the Tasmanian Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment for allowing the shells to be utilized under the permit. We thank Professor Richard Cosgrove and Dr Matthew Meredith-Williams, La Trobe University for their support. The authors would like to acknowledge the Traditional Owners and Elders of the Tasmanian Aboriginal community.
